**From the ground to the cloud**

On April of 2013, a new oak tree was planted in place of the Lincoln Oak
that Hurricane Sandy overturned the year before. The planting served as
part of a celebration of the 375th anniversary of New Haven's founding,
which took place on the Green. Several important members of the New
Haven community came together to help plant the new tree, including
then-mayor John DeStefano, the Urban Resources Initiative, Common Ground
and Sound students, and more. During the celebratory event, the city
exhibited photos and information about the contents of the time capsule.
New Haven citizens showed up to learn about the uncovered mystery and to
see if their guesses about what might be held inside the capsule were
correct.

The following year, the New Haven Museum curated an exhibition to
commemorate the uprooting of the Lincoln Oak and the contents that were
found beneath it. They titled it "Nothing is Set in Stone: The Lincoln
Oak and the New Haven Green," which ran from April of 2014 to January of
2015. The exhibition featured pieces that local New Haven artists
created using pieces of the old Lincoln Oak tree. The museum also
included scientific data about the skeletal remains that were uncovered
in the Green as well as the items that were found in the two time
capsules. Several research organizations in New Haven contributed to the
curation.

Today, the New Haven Museum preserves the time capsule, though it is not
publicly exhibited. As with many of the museum's treasures, the capsule
is located at the Whitman Library, and you need to request it in order
to have access. The objects and the time capsule itself, as well as the
Abraham Lincoln sculpture made from the wood of the Lincoln Memorial Oak
fallen in 2012, are all neatly cataloged and organized for anyone
interested in seeing, touching, or reading any of them. But you need to
know what you are looking for. That is where librarians come into the
picture. People like Ed Surato are always paying attention to the
visitors\' needs and curiosity, eager to assist with obtaining digital
scans of any items or finding out further information.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="2.619792213473316in"
height="2.9817989938757656in"}

**Figure 1:**

But why is a time capsule that was buried in 1909 important to us today?
More than anything, the historical objects it contains provide valuable
insight to the history of New Haven. From the business cards to the
military records in the capsule, all of these objects give people in our
age a taste of what life was like in the early 20th century. The
newspapers\' articles feature stories that range from bills killed by
the New Haven legislature to plans to celebrate the Lincoln centennial
in the city. All of these artifacts and texts come together to paint a
picture of what the values and practices of New Haven looked like over a
hundred years ago. This image becomes even more interesting when we
compare it to contemporary New Haven. With advancements in technology
and more progressive social views, quite a lot has changed from the time
this capsule was put together. Still, some things remain the same: one
newspaper features a critique of Yale University buildings, a
conversation that continues today.

Overall, the time capsule and the information surrounding it serve as
educational resources for a city rich in history. Though the museum has
no further projects planned with the time capsule, we should continue to
learn from it to keep expanding our knowledge of New Haven and its
people.
