---
layout: page
title: Time Capsule in 2022
permalink: /stories/2022/
---

On April of 2013, a new oak tree was planted in place of the Lincoln Oak that was overturned by Hurricane Sandy. The planting occurred during a celebration of the 375th anniversary of New Haven’s founding, which took place on the Green. Several important members of the New Haven community came together to help plant the new tree, including then-mayor John DeStefano, the Urban Resources Initiative, Common Ground and Sound students, and more. During the celebratory event, the city exhibited photos and information about the contents of the time capsule. New Haven citizens showed up to learn about the uncovered mystery and to see if their guesses about what might be held inside the capsule were correct. 

Today, the New Haven Museum preserves the time capsule, though it is not publicly exhibited. As with many of the museum’s treasures, the capsule is located at the Whitman Library, and you need to request it in order to have access. The objects and the time capsule itself, as well as the Abraham Lincoln sculpture made from the wood of the Lincoln Memorial Oak fallen in 2012, are all neatly cataloged and organized for anyone interested in seeing, touching, or reading any of them. But you need to know what you are looking for. That is where librarians come into the picture. People like Ed Surato are always paying attention to the visitors' needs and curiosity, eager to assist with obtaining digital scans of any items or finding out further information. 



But why is a time capsule that was buried in 1909 important to us today? More than anything, the historical objects it contains provide valuable insight to the history of New Haven. From the business cards to the military records in the capsule, all of these objects give people in our age a taste of what life was like in the early 20th century. The newspapers' articles feature stories that range from bills killed by the New Haven legislature to plans to celebrate the Lincoln centennial in the city. All of these artifacts and texts come together to paint a picture of what the values and practices of New Haven looked like over a hundred years ago. This image becomes even more interesting when we compare it to contemporary New Haven. With advancements in technology and more progressive social views, quite a lot has changed from the time this capsule was put together. Still, some things remain the same: one newspaper features a critique of Yale University buildings, a conversation that continues today. 

Overall, the time capsule and the information surrounding it serve as educational resources for a city rich in history. Though the museum has no further projects planned with the time capsule, we can continue to learn from it to keep expanding our knowledge of New Haven and its people.
